Introduction

It is important to model volume of water consumed in a poor urban area before a decision to extend water distribution network (WDN) to the area.   Researchers have applied various techniques to model and predict water consumption in urban areas. These techniques include autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) and multilinear regression (MLR) (Adamowski, 2008), artificial neural networks (ANN) (Adamowski, 2012; Ghiassi et al., 2008), random forests and support vector regression (Herrera et al., 2010), recurrent neural network and convolutional neural network (Medina, 2018), and differential-inspired artificial neural network (Oyebode, 2020). Though many studies have been carried out on household water demand in high-income countries, the corresponding body of work for low-income countries is significantly few. Searches done on academic research databases showed a few studies imputing geospatial variables into machine learning models to predict volume of water consumed in high-income countries, but none was found which uses integrated tool of geospatial technology (GST) and machine learning techniques (MLT) to study the influence of GSF on performance of machine learning models. (WSUP, 2016; Casali, et al., 2022; Kopczewska, 2022; Nikparvar & Thill, 2021). 
GST provides an environment for processing, analyzing and visualizing geospatial data and how they impact phenomena on, near or beneath the earth surface. Geospatial data includes information about the location, shape, and size of objects, as well as their relationships with other objects in space. Geospatial data or geospatial features (GSF) in machine learning models are variables or geographical features that represent real-world entities that are being modelled. Geospatial features (GSF) are important in machine learning modeling because they provide additional context and information that can improve the accuracy and effectiveness of models. 

Adding GSF to datasets fed into machine learning models could give insights into the influence of geospatial components on phenomena (Patel, 2021). For example, data about water consumption by the urban poor would usually include socioeconomic, demographic, weather and historical components. Since the people and their water sources are at definite locations on the earth surface, it means that their activities (water consumption in this case), and data that describe those activities, have geospatial components. The questions: Where? How far apart? And how high? can only be adequately answered if the location is spatially referenced; that is, the location of the phenomena (the people and their water sources) have values from which their distance apart and height difference can be deduced. GSF provides these values. Geospatial components could add to knowledge if explored. For instance, how does distance from the nearest water source influence the per capita water consumption in a household? What is the impact of height difference between the household location and the nearest water source on water consumption? The above example shows the importance of GSF in determining phenomena, such as volume of water consumed in a household.

GSF can provide valuable information for machine learning models (Ioannis, 2019). In predicting water consumption, geospatial data such as land use, distance from water source, and elevation can help identify areas where water is used more or less. Incorporating such information in models can lead to better predictions and more effective management strategies. Furthermore, GSF can help identify spatial dependencies and relationships that may not be apparent from other types of data. For example, water consumption in one location may be affected by activities or conditions in nearby areas. By incorporating GSF, machine learning models can capture these spatial dependencies and improve predictions. GSF can help modelers understand the spatial relationships between different variables. For example, it can be used to identify patterns and trends that occur within specific geographic regions. Geospatial data can be used to create new features that can be used in machine learning models. A model may use the distance and height difference between two locations as features to predict a certain outcome. This information can be used to develop more effective management strategies for water distribution networks. 

Machine learning techniques have been applied in the analysis of various geospatial data in many areas of geomatics and the environment such as spatial predictions, classification and mapping (Kang et al., 2021); natural hazards and environmental risk assessments (Mousavi et al., 2011); geoid modelling (Dawod & Abdel-Aziz, 2020); treatment and classification of remote sensing images, assimilation of data and science based models (Kanevski et al., 2008). In various other studies, random forest, K-nearest neighbour and support vector machine were used for land cover classification (Noi & Kappa, 2017; Pal, 2006; Shi & Yang, 2015), spatial data streams (Maleq, 2017), location searching (Gandhimathi et al., 2017), and urban development (Mirbagheri & Alimohammadi, 2018). Additionally, researchers have proposed a combination of neural networks with remote sensing image data for mapping the urbanization dynamics (Li et al., 2019; Liu, 2019; Tayyebi et al., 2011). Multilinear perceptron has been applied to the classiﬁcation of remotely sensed data to distinguish land cover types (Benediktsson, 1990; Civco, 1993; Dreyer, 1993; Hepner, 1990; Kanellopoulos et al., 1992; Key et al., 1989; Paola, 1995). Other studies use ANN for classification of land cover and landscape changes on various remote sensing images ((Dreyer, 1993; Foody et al., 1995; Pechanec et al., 2014), for mineral deposit mapping (Rigol-Sanchez et al., 2003), for studying geoid height, coordinate and height transformation (Yilmaz et al., 2017; Ziggah et al., 2019), to predict bus travel times (Arhin, 2021), and to study spatial interpolation (Nevtipilova et al., 2014).

The aim of this study is to examine the influence of geospatial features (GSF) on performance of machine learning models for predicting volume of water consumed by poor urban households. This study is necessary to provide solution to the problem of access to safe water for poor people living within urban areas in low-income countries. Accurately predicting volume of water consumed is the first step towards extending water distribution network to poor people, and solving the problem of lack of access to safe water. Thus, it is necessary to examine how GSF influence model performance.

Methodology

Datasets

The datasets and data pre-processing used in this study are described in Taiwo et. al (2023). 

Five geospatial data were used in this study: location of households, location of water points, return-trip travel time, elevation and land use land cover type. Geospatial data such as location of households and location of water points were collected with handheld GPS while DEM and LULC data were downloaded from appropriate websites. Location of household and location of water points are represented by the coordinates (shown in Tables 3.2) captured with handheld GPS. Return trip travel time is the time it takes to travel from a household to the nearest water point and back, including queueing time and time taken by detours. It was retrieved from questionnaire responses. 

Four GSFs were derived from the geospatial data. They are Travel time, Shortest distance, Height difference, and Land use land cover (LULC) type.

Complete Dataset

After feature creation and transformation, there were 30 features all together as shown in Table 1. Volume in liter per day is the dependent variable, the feature to be predicted. Thus, there are 29 predictor variables (listed in Table 1), together with 1200 observations, they form the complete dataset. 
2.3.3	 Control Dataset
The complete dataset without geospatial features acts as the control dataset. The aim is to use the control dataset to investigate the importance of geospatial features in the performance of machine learning models for predicting water consumption by poor urban households.

Coding the Models

Multilinear Regression (MLR), Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Regression (SVR), and Artificial Neural Network (ANN) were chosen for this work because they represent machine learning techniques in the supervised learning category for regression analysis (Kiwelekar et al., 2020).  

The complete dataset was first one-hot encoded before it was split into training, validation and test datasets.  The MLR, RF, SVR and ANN models, which were named model in the codes, were each created as an instance of their respective classes in Scikit Learn® library: SGDRegressor, RandomForestRegressor, LinearSVR and MLPRegressor, which were each infused with a scaler to scale the dataset (Pedregosa et al., 2012). model was fitted to the training dataset in order to learn the data. Three functions named training, validation and testing were coded to carry out prediction with training dataset, validation dataset and test dataset respectively. Each of them calls another function named evaluation, which evaluates the prediction with the three evaluation metrics and prints the results. The predicted volume of water consumed was printed into a csv file. 


Results

Examining Influence of Geospatial Features (GSF) on Model Performance

Using the complete dataset and control dataset described above, experiments were carried out to investigate the influence of GSF on model performances. Table 6, Table 7 and Table 8 show model performance with GSF (using the complete dataset) and without GSF (using the control dataset) included in the explanatory variables. The results show that including GSF considerably improved Multilinear Regression model performance as RMSE value decreased from 139 litres to 116 litres and R2 score rose from 50% to 65% during training. Also, there is improvement in Random Forest model performance as RMSE value decreased from 77 litres to 57 litres and R2 score increases from 85% to 92% during model training. Similarly, when GSF was added, Support Vector Regression model performance decreased from 130 litres to 110 litres and R2 score rose from 58% to 70% during training.   Artificial Neural Networks model also shows performance improvement with the addition of GSF as RMSE value decreased from 110 lires to 53 litres and R2 score increases from 68% to 93% during training. Figure 2 shows the plots of predicted volume against actual volume of water consumed when GSF were added to the variables and when they were not. All four models performed better when GSF added into them. 

Conclusion

This study examined the influence of geospatial features (GSF) on performance of machine learning models for predicting volume of water consumed by poor urban households. Three GSF – travel time, shortest distance and height difference, which correlated with the target variable – were selected from 29 features. The influence of the GSF on Multilinear Regression, Random Forest, Support Vector Regression and Artificial Neural Networks models were examined. The results show that including GSF considerably improved Multilinear Regression model performance as RMSE value decreased from 139 litres to 116 litres and R2 score rose from 50% to 65% during training. Also, for Random Forest model performance, RMSE value decreased from 77 litres to 57 litres and R2 score increases from 85% to 92% during model training, while that for Support Vector Regression model performance decreased from 130 litres to 110 litres and R2 score rose from 58% to 70%. Artificial Neural Networks model also shows performance improvement with the addition of GSF as RMSE value decreased from 110 lires to 53 litres and R2 score increases from 68% to 93%, during training. Though adding GSF to the models show improvement in model performance but t-test carried out on the results at 95% confidence level shows the significance of the improvement. The test shows that including GSF in Multilinear Regression, Random Forest and Support Vector Regression has no significant difference on model performance. But the improvement is significant for Artificial Neural Network. These results show the importance of including GSF to machine learning models for predicting volume of water consumed by poor urban households. 
